## Frequently Asked Questions

### Can I host WBS Deploy locally?

Due to the OAuth configuration for MediaWiki and QuickStatements, along with the automatic SSL certification generated by Traefik, you must specify a value for `WIKIBASE_PUBLIC_HOST` in your `.env` file. This value should be a domain name that resolves to the IP address of the server hosting these services and must be accessible on the Internet.

However, for testing purposes WBS Deploy can be run locally or on a server that is not accessible to the Internet, with the following caveats:

- In this configuration, you will still need to set `WIKIBASE_PUBLIC_HOST` to hostnames that resolve locally to the IP address of the machine running the services. Configuring locally resolving DNS entries differs depending on your environment (Linux, MacOS, Windows), so setting this up correctly will require knowledge of or additional research about your specific setup. 
- Any SSL certificates generated in this setup will be invalid, though you can optionally bypass the warning about these invalid certificates when first loading the Wikibase site in the browser.
- QuickStatements will not function in this setup, as OAuth will not authorize against a local, non-Internet-accessible Wikibase installation.

### Can I migrate from another Wikibase installation to WBS Deploy?

It is possible to migrate an existing Wikibase installation to WBS Deploy. The general procedure is as follows:

- [Back up your MediaWiki](https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/Manual:Backing_up_a_wiki)
- [Install Wikibase Suite](#initial-setup) as described above
- Re-apply any [changes](#customizing-your-wikibase-suite-mediawiki) to `config/LocalSettings.php`
- Import your database dump
- Regenerate the WDQS database
- Regenerate the Elasticsearch database

### My WDQS Updater keeps crashing, what can I do?

Check out the known issue in the [WDQS README](../build/wdqs/README.md#Known-issues). You may find your solution there in the form of a workaround.

### Do you recommend any VPS hosting providers?

As of this writing, we can offer no specific recommendations for VPS providers to host Wikibase Suite. The suite has been tested successfully on various providers; as long as the [minimum technical requirements](#hardware) are met, it should run as expected.

### Where can I get further help?

If you have questions not listed above or need help, use this [bug report form](https://phabricator.wikimedia.org/maniphest/task/edit/form/129/) to start a conversation with the engineering team.